# Analysis of secondary metabolite biosynthetis gene clusters in lichen metagenomes
[Mémoire de recherche en Bioinformatique, Uliège, 2022.]

Lichens are organisms resulting from the symbiotic association between a fungus and a photosynthetic partner, a green alga or a cyanobacterium. The unique chemical diversity that results from this way of life reveals numerous compounds with various therapeutic interests.

To exploit this potential, I use a recent method of genome reconstruction for six species of Peltigera lichens and highlight the capabilities of automated bioinformatics tools in the context of this metagenomic study. After obtaining the genome assemblies, the genetic motifs involved in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites of cyanobionts were investigated with automated bioinformatics tools.

In a first step, this study demonstrated the validity of the metagenomic assembly protocol to reconstruct the genome of cyanobionts of the genus Nostoc from Peltigera species collected in the wild. In a second step, the investigation of the Nostoc genomes revealed a remarkably high biosynthetic potential and promise for the discovery of new natural products. The gene clusters mainly detected were associated with the NRPS (non-ribosomal peptide synthetases) and PKS (polyketide synthases) enzyme synthesis pathways. On the other hand, the majority of the genetic biosynthetic pathways detected in this study had no biological description to date. These observations highlighted the interest in automated methods in the search for new metabolomic profiles. Finally, the identification of particularly rich secondary metabolite synthesis potentials revealed by cyanobionts from P.appalacchensis, P.asiatica, P.borenquensis, and P.mikado species, suggested a genetic heritage.
